Chapter 6: Working with Methods and Encapsulation
1. C. The protected modifier allows access by subclasses and members within the same package,
while the package-private modifier allows access only to members in the same package.
Therefore, the protected access modifier allows access to everything the package-private
access modifier, plus subclasses, making Option C the correct answer. Options A, B, and D
are incorrect because the first term is a more restrictive access modifier than the second term.
2. B. The super() statement is used to call a constructor in a parent class, while the this()
statement is used to call a constructor in the same class, making Option B correct and
Option A incorrect. Options C and D are incorrect because they are not constructors.
3. D. The sell() method does not compile because it does not return a value if both of the
if-then statements’ conditional expressions evaluate to false. While logically, it is true
that price is either less than 10 or greater than or equal to 10, the compiler does not know
that. It just knows that if both if-then statements evaluate to false, then it does not have a
return value, therefore it does not compile.
4. D. The three overloaded versions of nested() compile without issue, since each method
takes a different set of input arguments, making Options B and C incorrect. The code does
not compile, though, due to the first line of the main() method, making Option A incorrect.
The no-argument version of the nested() method does not return a value, and trying
to output a void return type in the print() method throws an exception at runtime.
Chapter 6: Working with Methods and Encapsulation 453
5. B. Java uses pass-by-value to copy primitives and references of objects into a method. That
means changes to the primitive value or reference in the method are not carried to the calling
method. That said, the data within an object can change, just not the original reference
itself. Therefore, Option B is the correct answer, and Options C and D are incorrect.
Option A is not a real term.
6. C. Option A is incorrect because the getter should return a value. Option B is incorrect
because the setter should take a value. Option D is incorrect because the setter should start
with set and should not return a value. Option C is a correct setter declaration because it
takes a value, uses the void return type, and uses the correct naming convention.
7. B. Options A, C, and D are true statements about calling this() inside a constructor.
Option B is incorrect because a constructor can only call this() or super() on the first
line of the constructor, but never both in the same constructor. If both constructors were
allowed to be called, there would be two separate calls to super(), leading to duplicate initialization
of parent constructors, since the other constructor referenced by this() would
also call super() (or be chained to one that eventually calls super()).
8. B. Option A is incorrect because the public access modifier starts with a lowercase letter.
Options C and D are incorrect because the return types, void and String, are incompatible
with the method body that returns an integer value of 10. Option B is correct and has
package-private access. It also uses a return type of Long that the integer value of 10 can be
easily assigned to without an explicit cast.
9. C. The only variables always available to all instances of the class are those declared
static; therefore, Option C is the correct answer. Option A may seem correct, but public
variables are only available if a reference to the object is maintained among all instances.
Option B is incorrect because there is no local keyword in Java. Option D is also incorrect
because a private instance variable is only accessible within the instance that created it.
10. A. First off, all of the lines compile but they produce various different results. Remember
that the default initialization of a boolean instance variable is false, making outside
false at line p1. Therefore, this(4) will cause rope to be set to 5, while this(5) will
cause rope to be set to 6. Since 5 is the number we are looking for, Option A is correct, and
Option C is incorrect. Option B is incorrect. While the statement does create a new instance
of Jump, with rope having a value of 5, that instance is nested and the value of rope does
not affect the surrounding instance of Jump that the constructor was called in. Option D
is also incorrect. The value assigned to rope is 4, not the target 5.
11. B. Options A, C, and D are true statements. In particular, Option C allows us to write
the equals() methods between two objects that compare private attributes of the class.
Option D is true because protected access also provides package-private access. Option B
is false. Package-private attributes are only visible if the two classes are in the same package,
regardless of whether one extends the other.
12. D. The class data, stuff, is declared public, allowing any class to modify the stuff variable
and making the implementation inherently unsafe for encapsulation. Therefore, there are no
values that can be placed in the two blanks to ensure the class properly encapsulates its data,
making Option D correct. Note that if stuff was declared private, Options A, B, and C
would all be correct. Encapsulation does not require JavaBean syntax, just that the internal
attributes are protected from outside access, which all of these sets of values do achieve.
454 Appendix ■ Answers to Review Questions
13. C. Option A is incorrect because Java only inserts a no-argument constructor if there are
no other constructors in the class. Option B is incorrect because the parent can have a
default no-argument constructor, which is inserted by the compiler and accessible in the
child class. Finally, Option D is incorrect. A class that contains two no-argument constructors
will not compile because they would have the same signature. Finally, Option C is
correct. If a class extends a parent class that does not include a no-argument constructor,
the default no-argument constructor cannot be automatically inserted into the child class
by the compiler. Instead, the developer must explicitly declare at least one constructor and
explicitly define how the call to the parent constructor is made.
14. A. A method may contain at most one varargs parameter, and it must appear as the last
argument in the list. For this reason, Option A is correct, and Options B, C, and D are
incorrect.
15. C. To solve this problem, it helps to remember that Java is a pass-by-value language in
which copies of primitives and object references are sent to methods. This also means that
an object’s data can be modified within a method and shared with the caller, but not the
reference to the object. Any changes to the object’s reference within the method are not carried
over to the caller. In the slalom() method, the Ski object is updated with an age
value of 18. Although, the last line of the slalom() method changes the variable value to
null, it does not affect the mySkier object or reference in the main() method. Therefore,
the mySkier object is not null and the age variable is set to 18, making Options A and
D incorrect. Next, the name variable is reassigned to the Wendy object, but this does not
change the reference in the main() method, so myName remains Rosie. Finally, the speed
array is assigned a new object and updated. Since the array is updated after the reference
is reassigned, it does not affect the mySpeed array in the main() method. The result is that
mySpeed continues to have a single element with the default int value of 0. For these reasons,
Option B is incorrect, and Option C is correct.
16. B. Options A and D would not allow the class to compile because two methods in the class
cannot have the same name and arguments, but a different return value. Option C would
allow the class to compile, but it is not a valid overloaded form of our findAverage()
method since it uses a different method name. Option B is a valid overloaded version of the
findAverage() method, since the name is the same but the argument list differs.
17. D. Implementing encapsulation prevents internal attributes of a class from being modified
directly, so Option C is a true statement. By preventing access to internal attributes, we can
also maintain class data integrity between elements, making Option B a true statement.
Option A is also a true statement about encapsulation, since well-encapsulated classes are
often easier to use. Option D is an incorrect statement. Encapsulation makes no guarantees
about performance and concurrency.
18. A. Option B is incorrect because String values are immutable and cannot be modified.
Options C and D are also incorrect since variables are passed by value, not reference, in
Java. Option A is the correct answer. The contents of an array can be modified when passed
to a method, since a copy of the reference to the object is passed. For example, the method
can change the first element of a non-empty array.
Chapter 6: Working with Methods and Encapsulation 455
19. B. Option A is not a valid syntax in Java. Option C would be correct if there was a
static import, but the question specifically says there are not any. Option D is almost
correct, since it is a way to call the method, but the question asks for the best way to call
the method. In that regard, Option B is the best way to call the method, since we are
given that two classes are in the same package, therefore the package name would not be
required.
20. D. Options A and B are incorrect because a method with a non-void return type requires
that the method return a value using the return statement. Option C is also incorrect since
a method with a void return type can still call the return command with no values and
exit the method. Therefore, Option D is the correct answer.
21. C. The finish() method modifies two variables that are marked final, score and
result. The score variable is modified by the post-increment ++ operator, while the
result variable is modified by the compound addition += operator. Removing both final
modifiers allows the code to compile. For this reason, Option C is the correct answer.
22. D. The super() statement is used to call a constructor in the parent class, while super is
used to reference a member of the parent class. The this() statement is used to call a constructor
in the current class, while this is used to reference a member of the current class.
For these reasons, Option D is the correct answer.
23. B. The method signature has package-private, or default, access; therefore, it is accessible
to classes in the same package, making Option B the correct answer.
24. A. The access modifier of strength is protected, meaning subclasses and classes within
the same package can modify it. Changing the value to private would improve encapsulation
by making the Protect class the only one capable of directly modifying it. For these
reasons, the first statement is correct. Alternatively, the second and third statements do not
improve the encapsulation of the class. While having getters and setters for private variables
is helpful, they are not required. Encapsulation is about protecting the data elements.
With this in mind, it is clear the material variable is already protected. Therefore, Option
A is the correct answer.
25. A. Option A is correct since method names may include the underscore _ character as well
as the dollar $ symbol. Note that there is no rule that requires a method start with a lowercase
character; it is just a practice adopted by the community. Option B is incorrect because
the hyphen - character may not be part of a method name. Option C is incorrect since new
is a reserved word in Java. Finally, Option D is incorrect. A method name must start with a
letter, the dollar $ symbol, or an underscore _ character.
26. D. The code does not compile, regardless of what is inserted into the line because the
method signature is invalid. The return type, int, should go before the method name and
after any access, final, or static modifiers. Therefore, Option D is the correct answer. If
the method was fixed, by swapping the order of int and static in the method declaration,
then Option C would be the correct answer. Options A and B are still incorrect, though,
since each uses a return type that cannot be implicitly converted to int.
456 Appendix ■ Answers to Review Questions
27. B. Java uses pass-by-value, so changes made to primitive values and object references
passed to a method are not reflected in the calling method. For this reason, Options A
and C are incorrect statements. Option D is also an invalid statement because it is a special
case of Option A. Finally, Option B is the correct answer. Changes to the data within
an object are visible to the calling method since the object that the copied reference points
to is the same.
28. C. The code contains a compilation problem in regard to the contents instance variable.
The contents instance variable is marked final, but there is a setContents()
instance method that can change the value of the variable. Since these two are incompatible,
the code does not compile, and Option C is correct. If the final modifier was
removed from the contents variable declaration, then the expected output would be
of the form shown in Option A.
29. A. JavaBean methods use the prefixes get, set, and is for boolean values, making Option
A the correct choice.
30. C. Option A is incorrect because the keywords static and import are reversed. The
Closet class uses the method getClothes() without a reference to the class name Store,
therefore a static import is required. For this reason, Option B is incorrect since it is
missing the static keyword. Option D is also incorrect since static imports are used
with members of the class, not a class name. Finally, Option C is the correct answer since it
properly imports the method into the class using a static import.
31. D. In Java, the lack of an access modifier indicates that the member is package-private,
therefore Option D is correct. Note that the default keyword is used for interfaces and
switch statements, and is not an access modifier.
32. B. The code does not compile, so Option A is incorrect. The class contains two constructors
and one method. The first method, Stars(), looks a lot like a no-argument constructor, but
since it has a return value of void, it is a method, not a constructor. Since only constructors
can call super(), the code does not compile due to this line. The only constructor in this
class, which takes an int value as input, performs a pointless assignment, assigning a variable
to itself. While this assignment has no effect, it does not prevent the code from compiling.
Finally, the main() method compiles without issue since we just inserted the full package
name into the class constructor call. This is how a class that does not use an import statement
could call the constructor. Since the method is in the same class, and therefore the same
package, it is redundant to include the package name but not disallowed. Because only one
line causes the class to fail to compile, Option B is correct.
33. A. An instance method or constructor has access to all static variables, making
Option A correct. On the other hand, static methods and static initializers cannot
reference instance variables since they are defined across all instances, making Options
B and C incorrect. Note that they can access instance variables if they are passed a reference
to a specific instance, but not in the general case. Finally, Option D is incorrect
because static final variables must be set when they are declared or in a static initialization
block.
Chapter 6: Working with Methods and Encapsulation 457
34. B. The method calculateDistance() requires a return type that can be easily converted
to a short value. Options A, C, and D are incorrect because they each use a larger data
type that requires an explicit cast. Option D also does not compile because the Short constructor
requires an explicit cast to convert the value of 4, which is assumed to be an int,
to a short, as shown in new Short((short)4). Option B is the correct answer since a
byte value can be easily promoted to short and returned by the method.
35. C. Overloaded methods have the same name but a different list of parameters, making the
first and third statements true. The second statement is false, since overloaded methods can
have the same or different return types. Therefore, Option C is the correct answer.
36. C. The declaration of monday does not compile, because the value of a static final variable
must be set when it is declared or in a static initialization block. The declaration of
tuesday is fine and compiles without issue. The declaration of wednesday does not compile
because there is no data type for the variable. Finally, the declaration of thursday does not
compile because the final modifier cannot appear before the access modifier. For these
reasons, Option C is the correct answer.
37. D. The Puppy class does not declare a constructor, so the default no-argument constructor
is automatically inserted by the compiler. What looks like a constructor in the class is actually
a method that has a return type of void. Therefore, the line in the main() method to
create the new Puppy(2) object does not compile, since there is no constructor capable of
taking an int value, making Option D the correct answer.
38. A. The public modifier allows access to members in the same class, package, subclass, or
even classes in other packages, while the private modifier allows access only to members
in the same class. Therefore, the public access modifier allows access to everything the
private access modifier does, and more, making Option A the correct answer. Options B,
C, and D are incorrect because the first term is a more restrictive access modifier than the
second term.
39. A. The code compiles without issue, so Option D is incorrect. The key here is that Java uses
pass by value to send object references to methods. Since the Phone reference p was reassigned
in the first line of the sendHome() method, any changes to the p reference were made
to a new object. In other words, no changes in the sendHome() method affected the object
that was passed in. Therefore, the value of size was the same before and after the method
call, making the output 3 and Option A the correct answer.
40. B. Options A and D are equivalent and would allow the code to compile. They both are
proper ways to access a static method from within an instance method. Option B is the
correct answer. The class would not compile because this.Drink has no meaning to the
compiler. Finally, Option C would still allow the code to compile, even though it is considered
a poor coding practice. While static members should be accessed in a static way, it
is not required.
41. C. The method signature requires one int value, followed by exactly one String, followed
by String varargs, which can be an array of String values or zero or more individual
String values. Only Option C conforms to these requirements, making it the correct
answer.
458 Appendix ■ Answers to Review Questions
42. D. Option A is a statement about final static variables, not all static variables.
Option B only applies to static variables marked private, not final. Option C is false
because static imports can be used to reference both variables and methods. Option D is
the correct answer because a static variable is accessible to all instances of the class.
43. A. Option A is the correct answer because the first line of a constructor could be this() or
super(), making it an untrue statement. Option B is a true statement because the compiler
will insert the default no-argument constructor if one is not defined. Option C is also a true
statement, since zero or more arguments may be passed to the parent constructor, if the
parent class defines such constructors. Option D is also true. The value of a final instance
variable should be set when it is declared, in an initialization block, or in a constructor.
44. D. The last static initialization block accesses height, which is an instance variable,
not a static variable. Therefore, the code will not compile no matter how many final
modifiers are removed, making Option D the correct answer. Note that if the line
height = 4; was removed, then no final modifiers would need to be removed to make
the class compile.
45. D. Since a constructor call is not the first line of the RainForest() constructor, the compiler
inserts the no-argument super() call. Since the parent class, Forest, does not define
a no-argument super() constructor, the RainForest() constructor does not compile, and
Option D is correct.
46. A. The code compiles without issue, so Option D is incorrect. In the main() method, the
value 2 is first cast to a byte. It is then increased by one using the addition + operator.
The addition + operator automatically promotes all byte and short values to int. Therefore,
the value passed to the choose() in the main() method is an int. The choose(int)
method is called, returning 5 and making Option A the correct answer. Note that without
the addition operation in the main() method, byte would have been used as the parameter
to the choose() method, causing the choose(short) to be selected as the next closest type
and outputting 2, making Option B the correct answer.
47. C. The variable startTime can be automatically converted to Integer by the compiler, but
Integer is not a subclass of Long. Therefore, the code does not compile due the wrong variable
type being passed to the getScore() method on line m2, and Option C is correct.
48. A. Java methods must start with a letter, the dollar $ symbol, or underscore _ character.
For these reasons, Options B and D are incorrect, and Option A is correct. Option C is
incorrect. The hashtag (#) symbol cannot be included in a method name.
49. B. The protected modifier allows access by any subclass or class that is in the same package,
therefore Option B is the correct answer.
50. D. A static import is used to import static members of another class. In this case, the
withdrawal() and deposit() methods in the Bank class are not marked static. They
require an instance of Bank to be used and cannot be imported as static methods. Therefore,
Option D is correct. If the two methods in the Bank class were marked static, then
Option A would be the correct answer since wildcards can be used with static imports to
import more than one method. Option B reverses the keywords static and import, while
Option C incorrectly imports a class, which cannot be imported via a static import.